Hello, this is the 16th PBC Morning Dawn webcast from Padmasamyaling, the Venerable Kemperimiches G
ompa, in New York.
So today we'll be discussing from their book, The Buddhist Path, Chapter 16, called Vajrayana
Meditation.
Thanks so much for joining us, and then we'll do our usual opening prayers, and then have the
discussion. Thank you.
(Sadhguru chants)
This supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school,
you keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great temple, I pray at your Lord
's feet.
In the palace of the old man Dhamma Daptu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times,
the one who shows clearly the dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honourable Rupkuru,
glorious fruit-teacher, precious one, dwelling on the lowest seat in the crown of my head,
follow me with your great kindness, and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
(Sadhguru chants)
Thanks. So again we're in Chapter 16 called Vajrayana Meditation in the Buddhist Path, and it
begins on page 79,
and then we'll give a brief summary of the first half of the chapter, and then we'll go into our
discussion.
So the Venerable Kevirama Chas begin by saying that Vajrayana meditation techniques
enable us to let go of our limited ideas about reality and experience what is beyond the five
senses.
If we perceive something through our five senses, we believe it exists.
If we don't experience it directly through our senses, we think it is not there.
We mostly believe in what we see and hear. But how reliable are our five senses?
Do we perceive everything that is happening?
According to Vajrayana, there's a lot we don't perceive with our limited dualistic perception.
For example, we can see far beyond our present moments and sense impressions into the past and
future.
Great enlightened masters like Buddha Shakyamuni and Guru Padmasambhava
experienced reality without duality mistakes. By directly realizing the emptiness of all phenomena,
they could experience phenomena accurately throughout all time and space
and perform amazing activities like leaving handprints and solid rock.
The Mahayana and Vajrayana vehicles taught by the Buddha both lead to enlightenment,
but the principal difference is that Vajrayana does this much more quickly
by directly revealing the nature of the mind.
In Vajrayana, there are two main practices, the creation stage visualization
and the completion stage dissolution.
Creation stage emphasizes the pure nature of all forms and sounds
by using visualization and mantra recitation,
while completion stage emphasizes pure mind
by directly recognizing and relaxing into the nature of the mind
beyond all conceptions and dualistic fabrications.
So then we'll go into the first main topic.
This comes from page 79, the second fourth paragraph,
as well as page 81, the first full paragraph.
According to the Vajrayana tradition, things can be known without being seen or heard.
For example, by doing Vipassana practice, one gains insight that enables you
to see things never previously imagined.
Our mental ability goes far beyond our current sense perceptions and thoughts.
To reach enlightenment, it is necessary to go beyond our limited ideas
and discover the wisdom nature.
Among the vehicles taught by the Buddha,
both the Mahayana and the Vajrayana lead to enlightenment.
The main difference is that the Mahayana is a more gradual path,
whereas the Vajrayana directly reveals the nature of Mahayana.
Vajrayana meditation practice does this in two main ways,
through creation stage practice and completion stage practice.
The creation stage uses visualizations to reveal that the universe,
both internal and external, is pure light.
In order to display the self-existing primordial wisdom,
we have to transform old habits of perceiving whatever we see here
and touch as being solid and truly existent.
In creation stage practice,
we visualize a pure land containing pure deities and enlightened beings,
such as Vajrasattva or Guru Pama Samabha.
When we meditate on the body of the deity,
we perceive our own body transformed into a pure, absolute body,
and we see that all sentient beings, ourselves and others,
are pure and primordial enlightenment.
The visualization practices display the pure nature of reality.
It is because of our mind's habitual ways of discriminating between things
that we create a static world that is actually unreal.
Visualization practice breaks our habitual, ignorant thinking
so that we can experience the purity and equality of all phenomena
and perceive their wisdom and nature.
I had a questioner who thought about this.
They kind of emphasized at the beginning going beyond the five senses,
so that would leave the sixth sense of mind as the principal actor.
What would be an example of going beyond the five senses
and breaking through our normal ordinary way of perceiving things?
Anyone think of a specific example?
Maybe this wouldn't be considered beyond the five senses, but maybe a parallel.
You think about how, as a basic example, like when you use a microscope,
it's a tool, and of course the naked eye isn't going to be seeing
the detail of protozoa the same way that, okay, magnify it 50 times.
Oh, look at all these beautiful details.
All the tools of science are how do we actually expand our perception?
And of course, with science, the metaphor doesn't quite line up with what Vajrayana does
because we're just expanding, in the case of a microscope,
we're just expanding the eye perception.
But I think at that same way, there's still that understanding that
with that use of a tool, in this case Vajrayana,
you'll see something that you couldn't see with your five senses.
In the case of science, you're using a tool to see something
that you can't see normally with your eye faculty.
It's on a base level.
It seems to kind of like, I got the impression more of Shazar talking here.
We rely on our five senses as to things we've seen with our eyes
that we're eventually used to seeing.
Things we hear, and taste, and smell, and touch,
and are the ways our bodies appear and our world appears.
But then with the Vajrayana meditations,
I mean like we don't so often see, for example,
like a being the size of the universe,
like who's brighter than five trillion moons on a glacial mountain
with eleven faces and one thousand arms,
and nectar is flowing to all the beings of all the realms
and satisfying all the hungry ghosts.
Examples like that, that's kind of something we don't ordinarily see.
So, you know, I think that's not a technical point they're putting as far as that,
like the five senses and the mind sense,
but just that we take everything that's real just for the limited experience we have.
And these instructions and visualizations involve sights and sounds
and, you know, the senses, but it's expanding possibilities,
like settling down into another lighter kind of possibility.
I was thinking about along those same lines,
how the, like the, as soon as you visualize and say the creation stage,
say if you close your eyes, that has nothing to do with the eye consciousness anymore.
Any image in your mind is purely mental because the eye is not perceiving anything,
the mind is perceiving the mind, just like in a dream.
So it's like in one second or in one minute you can have a whole vast dream
and totally fill in all the details of the dream with a world and a history
and all the different characters and actors,
and it all takes place within the space of mind, which is really, you know,
the five senses are inactive basically, you're just asleep to outward appearances.
But on the internal state, like Kinchen Trang Gurubhaj,
that really struck me in this, I think he has a book,
Everyday Consciousness and Buddha Awakening, about the eight consciousnesses.
But he really says that visualization creation stage practice
is all about just training the mind, and visualization has nothing to do with the eyesight.
So you can see the deity from the front and the back and the top and the bottom
at the same time because it's not related with space and time,
like the five senses normally are.
So that was kind of a cool point to me.
That kind of struck me about the first part being like,
not your habitual way of, you know, just see something from the front,
that means you can't see behind, you know, kind of thing.
Or even, even in depictions, I mean, they're all, they're drawn, you know,
so it's like, you know, we can only do so much with our eye,
I mean, where our mind can make it three dimensional.
I was thinking about that today, but it's just like, if we really get creative with it,
I mean, which is the point, I mean, I guess, in a way within, yeah, confines,
but how we can make it living or real or, I don't know, it's fascinating how that goes.
Yeah, I think that my understanding is not from personal experience,
but that if you can really concentrate in terms of the visualization,
that you're actually, your ordinary sense perceptions can actually be sort of overcome.
You know what I mean? That you can drop off that sense,
the usual sense of impressions will actually drop away at a certain point of concentration,
and that, you know, they talk about how eventually people often visualize with their eyes open,
but they're seeing the visualization, they're not seeing the table particularly,
they're actually being able to see the visualization that their concentration is so strong,
that the senses have, ordinary senses have somewhat dropped away.
Does that make sense? Sorry.
No, I guess more than somewhat. They say they really do.
I haven't experienced this, but I've certainly heard about that.
That's like when we're daydreaming, too.
Yeah, that's right. We know about that.
[Laughter]
It's just your fantasy.
But when you're daydreaming, I mean, you're not really using your five senses that well.
No, I'm not, because you're just out of it, really.
I would say, too, maybe a related point with,
or something that struck me, too, with this first topic point.
The Dvashriyana, or this visualization creation stage practice,
isn't so much about just seeing something more subtle.
It does include things that are more subtle that we don't usually see.
But I think a lot of part of the point is also the flexibility
of what perspectives we take.
It can be really small and then become really big.
It can be seen from this side or that side, just like you said.
And it can transform into something different.
It's really uprooting, like in that quote here,
"It is because our mind's habitual ways of discriminating between things
create a static world that is actually unreal."
It's like that freezing of our experience that we so take for granted
that this perceiver in here just matter-of-factly knows what's going on
and what is presented to the perceiver is just what's really out there, going on.
But to actually use the imaginative or the creative capacity of mind
to actually open up and directly experience it,
as if we're pretending things, but to actually become more flexible,
to take multiple perspectives simultaneously,
to break through that, just that they were so convinced.
It's just this way, this way that we've experienced it before,
that matter-of-fact taken for grantedness gets loosened up
and it gets more flexible and more sensitive and more fluid and dynamic.
Like the nature, it changes more easily.
So I would say the flexibility of the cognitive capacity,
as well as the precision with the concentration
and the vividness with the fresh present awareness,
that all those things really play into this visualization stage practice.
And that with that ability to take more perspectives,
it's so interesting how our static way, like what you said,
of seeing things is actually unreal.
In other words, we're fabricating now
and everybody takes that fabrication to be real
and that's the status quo, that's the five senses.
So then sometimes people think, but then the visualization is not real.
The visualization is a fabrication because you're creating something
and it's called the creation stage. And that's true, you know?
That's true, you are fabricating something, especially in the beginning.
But you're working with the flexibility
and taking the perspectives of untraining your mind
to see things in a static, fixed, unreal way,
so that you're actually becoming closer to the way things really actually are,
like the display of Agyasattva's Pure Land and Guru Palma Samhara.
So that's the interesting point of the vodka when it turns everything on its head,
that the way that it is now is actually pure.
That's the real thing, even though it's not substantially existing or solid.
So it's like, I just always find it interesting, it's an important point,
that like, oh, you're making something up with visualization.
Yeah, I'm making something up with visualization.
I'm making something up right now all the time with my normal,
diluted habit patterns oppressing my perspectives on everything all the time.
So you have to undo that, you have to have some mechanism,
and the vodka is so beautiful because it has so many methods of systematically undoing it,
whether it's in the dream state, in the waking state,
and you know what I mean? It uses all those boring, normal, real ways of doing things
and so it flips it, you know, until spontaneously,
like I think they say later in the chapter, like the Buddha's display,
spontaneously they perceive things as that spontaneous display of purity,
and equality, and the Pure Land stuff.
And that is the, that is real from that perspective, you know?
That kind of goes into the second point.
I have something I wanted to mention too, but I don't know if it's in the second point.
I just wanted, because in terms of what Andrew was saying about the whole thing
getting into the purity and sort of this, the bhajra yana creation stage
as a segue into purity is that, one way you can look at it is that
when we're visualizing ourselves as an enlightened being,
we're visualizing all those qualities of the enlightened being,
like the compassion and the wisdom, and then as we're doing that,
we start to actually feel those qualities, that we're deliberately cultivating those qualities
and actually, then at some point you sort of realize that those are your qualities.
You are that, and therefore, and everyone is that, you know, so that it actually, it takes you
there.
It takes you there by just simply contemplating the Buddha, whatever Buddha it is,
then you start feeling it, especially if you're doing the kind of visualization
where you're doing the light rays going out to all beings and coming back,
and to the Buddhas and coming back, you know, so that you're actually
really sort of dynamically projecting that love, that wisdom, that ability.
And it's a really wonderful technique in terms of that discovery of your own qualities
through the technique of visualizing the deity.
Actually, it's kind of, this is a slightly jokish version of what you were saying.
I remember once I was watching Rinpoche, and someone was juggling a lot of things,
you know, they were doing a lot of different tasks, and you start laughing a little bit.
He's like, "Oh, your Chenrezig practice is praying off. You got four arms now."
But, you know, it's a jokish way, but I think very similar to what you're saying,
in that sense of, you know, or a jokish way of highlighting as much as, you know, those qualities.
But they do, you know, they shine through, and there's that familiarity with it as well.
Yeah, that you're actually cultivating those states of mind.
You're cultivating these extremely positive qualities as you do the practice.
And the essential point, like Liah often brings up, the original title of this book,
Opening to Our Primordial Nature.
Oh, that's the second title.
The second title.
[laughter]
But the point being, that's the fundamental point.
Our nature is primordially pure. And like they say here,
in order to display the self-existing primordial wisdom, that's exactly what you're saying.
It's the display of our self-existing primordial wisdom.
That's what we're connecting with through this practice.
It's not connecting with the diluted display of our unreal habit patterns, you know.
It's connecting with our primordial wisdom, which is displaying all the time.
And the Vajrayalas, that means through which we recognize that.
It's so profound indeed.
Could I say one more thing?
Yeah.
Because it's nice now. I mean, just, it's great.
Just that point of this visualization practice being fundamentally based on the Sutra Mahayana
realization
or insight of emptiness, of all outer phenomena and all inner experiencer.
So everything, outer and inner is emptiness.
And that's very clear in the teachings on those three samadhis.
And this is the basis of visualization practice.
The first thing we do in practice is try to recognize the emptiness nature of our awareness and our
experience.
And then the second samadhi is its expression arising infinitely without yet having any fixed focus
object
but just unbounded qualities like total open flexible nature, like radiating boundlessly without
any particular object or activity it's trying to do.
And then just spontaneously.
And then thirdly, then those qualities crystallize into this visualization practice we're talking
about.
And then that gets more and more detailed and elaborate too with more active, engaging details or
outreaching activities or something.
But it's just to say sometimes, I just wanted to highlight that point, that it's really based on
that emptiness
or the fundamental inside of the Sutra Mahayana teachings of the Buddha.
That without this, that without the emptiness, it is pretend.
And we're always trying to connect to that nature, the cause is empty, the result is empty.
But when it's empty, it still arises because there's always form and how does it arise purely as a
deity in an enlightened universe doing enlightened activities.
And so just to highlight that emptiness, it's not as if it's just, we're like covered in costuming
everything in a nice way or something.
It's like the magical illusion samadhi, even though the arising, the magical.
It's okay to go into the second point, we'll do a quick summary of it going more to this completion
stage dissolution practice.
So the Kapurama Chas talk about the completion stage practice as being divided into two principal
sections.
There's first the completion stage with characteristics and then secondly the completion stage
without characteristics.
So the completion stage with characteristics is emphasized in Anayoga level of Buddha's teaching
and is also called, as in this text, subtle completion stage.
Or completion stage with a focus, this type of completion stage with characteristics still involves
grasping or holding on to some type of structure.
Then the completion stage without characteristics is emphasized in Zochen or the Atayoga level of
the teachings and it's also called great completion stage.
Or completion stage without any focus, without relying on any structures, effort or any grasping at
all.
And so in this chapter they're emphasizing completion stage with characteristics, which applies to
one's physical body.
Not only is the outer environment and its inhabitants all perceived as being already enlightened,
but within our own actual body are countless enlightened universes and enlightened beings.
And this is the true nature of our body and our speech.
This practice principally is connected to the three main systems of our body.
The channels wind energy and essence elements, which we discussed previously in chapter 10 which
begins page 49.
And then by focusing on our channels, the temporary knots, this is what Rinpoche has discussed in
this chapter.
By focusing on our channels, the temporary knots or blockages are released which allows our refined
wisdom winds to move more freely throughout our body.
Eventually pervading all of our channels so that our essence elements are undisturbed by our dual
ity mind and freely allowed to be as they naturally are, this natural bliss emptiness.
For someone who has mastered creation and completion stage practices, their enlightened activities
are unrestricted by limited dualistic habits.
So they can fulfill the two purposes of greatly benefiting themselves and others by helping all
beings realize enlightenment.
They then work constantly and only work to benefit all beings without experiencing any sense of
stress or burden.
They effortlessly, spontaneously emanate enlightened activities.
There's much more that exists than Rinpoche's conclude the chapter saying there's much more that
exists than we can perceive with our limited senses.
And they say they're mentioning these very advanced Bhatriyana practices to emphasize how precious
we all are and how precious this opportunity is.
And that we can actually use these practices to reveal our hidden enlightened nature and attain
enlightenment in this very life to effortlessly help all beings everywhere.
That's the chapter.
So on page 81, the second full paragraph, and then it jumps over to page 82 on the first full
paragraph.
After making progress in the visualization practice, one does the completion stage meditation.
The subtle completion stage practice applies to one's physical body.
From the Bhatriyana point of view, the body is no longer seen as unpleasant or impure.
Rather, it is considered to be totally enlightened.
The structure of the body corresponds to the structure of the external world.
And the body is recognized as the indestructible Vajra body and as a Vajrasiddhi filled with
enlightened beings.
The activities of enlightenment go far beyond ordinary concepts.
According to both Mahayana and Vajrayana, the purpose of accomplishing enlightenment is to benefit
all sentient beings.
So one of the things that struck me, actually it was in the second line when it mentions the subtle
completion stage practice applies to one's physical body.
I guess the word that struck me was subtle.
When they're saying that, what other levels of completion stage are being implied there?
Are they talking about a gross completion stage?
How is that put into context with the word subtle, I guess?
With characteristics.
Completion stage without characteristics, I think.
Completion stage with characteristics.
And this is with characteristics.
This is what they're referring to.
Yeah.
Like when you practice on an illusory body and the channel's winds, the essence elements, that's
all.
Completion stage with characteristics.
Okay.
Thank you.
I'm pretty sure that's what gave me my subtle completion stage.
It seems like we're in a subtle body.
Is without characteristics very subtle?
That's not holding at all the innermost.
Yeah, the innermost.
Okay. Yes, I see.
That makes more sense.
I mean, it's really so beautiful just that even in those few lines, it just goes down and down.
Vajra body goes into that enlightened body.
Oh, and then if you go further into that, now it's a whole mandala, it's a whole city.
All these enlightened beings, you're going to just clear and clear and clear.
As you were saying before, it's like, "Oh, yeah, you perceive it this way. Have fun when you get to
the goods."
I know.
It's quite beautiful.
It's totally, utterly, radically different than our usual way of experiencing things, than our
usual habit.
I mean, really, it's really good to take stock even if we've done Vajrayana practice for a long
time,
or we've read a lot of books, or we're totally new. This is like really saying that everything,
all the forms and things we experience, they're totally enlightened.
All the sounds and the communicating systems, the flowing patterns are all enlightened.
All the thoughts and emotions, where they come from, our mind is already enlightened.
So it is not enlightened.
From this view, nothing. From this view. From how a Buddha experiences things,
which is what these techniques are trying to train us to jump into,
to see how does an enlightened being experience things.
Meaning, how do we experience things right now, when our nature is revealed to ourselves,
and we don't lock it up with any mistaken habits.
But it's just good, it's just so radically different than how we experience things.
So I think it's good to emphasize that point.
And at the same time, like Rinpoche is really clearly emphasizing the point that it's so natural.
Actually, the funny thing is, this is the most natural thing we could ever do,
is be in our balanced mind, speech, and form.
One of the things that's interesting about seeing the completion stage,
particularly with this perspective too, is that it also puts the creation stage in a slightly
different perspective.
Particularly from someone who's really new at this, creation stage sometimes can feel like,
"Okay, I'm kind of painting on this visually."
And I think we talked about this a lot before.
It feels like you're kind of painting it on, and it's like,
"Okay, I'm going to do this, and I'm not really quite sure what it's doing,
but I'm going to do it."
You see all the people who practice it, and they're just pretty awesome people.
And then at the same time, when you get to the completion stage,
I think because so often there isn't a lot of words put on it,
it can be easy to fall in with your own habitual patterns.
Seeing completion stage is like, "Okay, I'm dropping that visualization,
and now I'm back to things the way I'm used to seeing it."
So it's so beautiful to see the completion stage from this way.
Because then it's saying, "Well, if you really want to get into it,
your creation stage was actually giving you much more of the truth
than dropping that creation stage and then thinking you have the truth."
I think we've already said a lot of that, but it was just interesting,
particularly the way that they really put completion stage in that perspective,
where if you're really practicing the completion stage,
you see the mandala, you see the vajra vai, it's all there.
That's actually getting past the conceptual framework
that makes you think, "Oh, this is more real."
Or the emptiness is blank, like some other completion stage,
or it's just like a vacuum, but that's kind of getting things going.
That is beyond that.
A point on that is that can be revealed in different ways,
like the creation stage and completion stage is a huge, giant topic,
but sometimes they reveal it sequentially like the creation stage
and then the completion stage.
Sometimes they talk about it as far as the inseparability
of the creation stage and completion stage,
so there's no distinction really.
In that sense, the creation stage is more the absolute nature
within which the whole visualization takes place.
So from the basis of the completion stage,
we engage in the creation stage, which is an inseparable spontaneous display
of the arising energy, and then once that's dropped,
it's the completion stage still.
So in other words, a lot of times at Zogchen you hear the inseparable union
of the creation and completion stage.
Is that the same with the Dharmadhatu in the Dharmakaya?
Is it like that?
Do you know?
As far as...
Yeah, I can't remember.
I can't remember how it came up, but...
I think it's more like the...
In this context, maybe it's more like the Dharmakaya
and its expression being the two form Kayas,
the Samboka Kaya and the Ramana Kaya.
Maybe it's more of a correlate.
The open, infinite, unrestricted, boundless nature arising,
like having that natural capacity to arise,
and then in ways that responsibly engages with bodhichitta
to bring to utter fulfillment everything that's involved.
I was just thinking about the question of
why this level of the subtle body with the channels,
winds and essence element is part of the completion stage
rather than sort of part of the creation stage
since you're still holding a focus.
And it's almost like the inner mandala,
rather than sort of the outer mandala of seeing the D&D,
like when we do Dejanjama, Queen of Great Blitz,
the first piece is about the outer deities,
in a sense, her body, guru-pavasambhava, and so forth.
But then the second mantra, we actually go into
all those deities that are inside her body,
that it's like a subtler level of completion stage.
Creation stage.
But then, I just answered my question in my mind,
which I'd like to bring up.
It's just that the idea that the reason...
I would think that one reason why...
We can talk about that,
why this is completion stage or not, creation stage is an interesting question.
But one thing is that I think that when you do this kind of creation stage,
completion with form, with characteristics,
that what it does is it brings the wisdom wind into the central channel
and therefore you actually experience nature of mind,
which is what the great completion stage is,
is that direct experience of nature of mind.
So that that would be maybe why it's included in completion stage
is that that is a way to induce that
for people who can't just actually sort of receive the transmission
and see it directly.
But anybody else have any thoughts about why it would be completion stage
and not further a subtler creation stage?
Not after what you said.
[laughter]
Somebody had to.
So we're saying there's many perspectives.
[laughter]
Maybe in some ways...
I mean, I think it's...
What I'm going to say I think is echoing what you're saying,
but that part of how focusing on the subtle body
or the channels and the winds and the essence element,
according to the instructions,
we're starting to pay attention to something that...
that we all directly have.
And yes, but there's that part of it,
so that it involves some degree of visualization,
but it's kind of like tuning in.
Like even if we think like, "Oh, can I feel my heartbeat?"
Or, "Can I feel my center of gravity?"
Or you know, just tuning,
like bringing that awareness to this subtler level and the natural.
Because part of that is that we're...
it seems like we're tuning into what's naturally arising,
and by being attention it starts to balance as well,
which is what you were saying.
But that part of how once things are already happening,
but when the winds start to balance and come into harmony
and merge with the central channel,
it's happening.
And so in a way it already is complete in that sense of how...
it's like things...
appearances are just spontaneously arising,
and when we have all the basis of, you know,
the view ends with, you know,
this meditation kind of activated.
I guess it's that sense of when it's activated,
which is what you're saying too.
Sorry, it wasn't there yet.
Yeah, no, but it is a slightly different slip.
That's what I was talking about there, each of us sees things slip differently.
Well, you can also see it as the union too.
Like they say all the inner tantras are actually the same,
just slightly different emphasis.
They all include them, they all include each other.
So, oftentimes Rinpoche is quote the...
Tantra, I guess Haruka Kapil, I don't know.
But they say, "Mahayoga is the ground,
Anya Yoga is the path, and Ahti Yoga is the completion."
Always quote that.
So, Mahayoga, the whole everything is a mandala.
That's the view in a way.
Anya Yoga, that what is outward is also inward,
so you've lost that sense that it's just an outward mandala.
Everything is a mandala.
One's own wins and essence elements and channels are that.
And then Ahti Yoga is a completion.
It's all in that total vastness, emptiness state of the nature, always, all the time.
And it's just where there's a completion stage without characteristics is
not tuning in specifically at that more subtle level,
maybe just letting everything go.
This is a whole thing, you know.
It's a... I don't know.
What is the whole thing? What's the end?
Completion state with characteristics.
Like they say, the Kala Chakra is the most majestic of Tantras
because it really goes into all the whole universe of the Vajra body
as a whole cosmos and it brings all that in one state.
So some people say that's the vastness of all the Tantras is kind of...
the Kala Chakra is a good example of the whole shebang.
But it's the completion stage.
And from that sense that it's all...
it's Maha Yoga, Arman Yoga, Ahti Yoga, everything is complete.
Within that, the arising, the mandala is arising within that awareness.
One thing, there's a small thing that came up in my brain.
I was thinking about the different books that I've gone through
that start to detail the Dzogchen practices
or pointing out the nature of the mind.
It seems so often the words "as it is" come up again and again.
And actually sometimes in the book they italicize "as it is."
And I think that may be one of the reasons
that it's considered the completion practice with character.
You know, it's the "as it is."
The mandala is there, the Vajra body.
It's not like these things are being projected on.
The mind is projecting so many things,
but this is "as it is."
It's not that this is being projected.
This is just "rest, see what's there."
I think we've made it just a simple one, but it just can't.
It's a good one.
I thought one point to go on with that
is that so much from what we've heard from chemical images
and other great masters as well
is that so much of the efficacy
and the heart of this is really
being with this practice as we do it.
Like really sincerely just dropping our doubt,
dropping our critical investigation for our practice period
and just really trying to sink into,
connect to the teaching according to the instruction.
And also how do we do that really?
Like relax.
We have to put effort into doing it,
but it should be kind of relaxed.
Otherwise it can get really tight
and becomes a big heavy burden.
And then we can be like,
"Oh, I don't have to do all this work anyway
because it's all free anyway."
We can go that mistake way.
So while this visualization practice
and while these accumulations.
And then there's two reasons on the inside.
We have all these habits, all these knots in our channels,
all these imbalances.
And these are techniques that very directly, quickly undo,
like target and undo and relax and release these tensions.
And at the same time,
the whole basis is to bodhicitta motivation.
What is that?
We have to communicate with other beings
in ways that are helpful.
And to send out light, like Anne was saying,
or to actually express,
we have to learn how to be flexibly engaged with other beings.
It's not just our own private path or something.
But then there's all these practices working with pure form
and pure sound on our own awareness.
This is actually a bodhisattva practice
to communicate and help all beings be enlightened.
So it's not like a big job.
We have to do all this stuff.
And we should just rest.
Like Rivichette said at the very end,
"We are resting."
And that spontaneously is like this outreaching word
to benefit all beings.
I have this one, Dogo Kensi,
in his beautiful fifth instructions on Zochen that he gives.
It always struck me how this on that point that you said.
He said, "Even when you're meditating on the channels,
winds, essence elements, or the tumo,
or all these different techniques,
don't withdraw your consciousness within
as though there's a "you" here
and then everything else that's not that.
Just like what you said.
You're not just closing everything out
and just focusing on something inward.
But that's the nature of the outer
and the inner is the same.
And I think that's part of the point, relaxing in that.
That always struck me how it's like,
"But it seems like you're really focusing."
But that's the completion stage.
You're not.
Even if you're using the winds
and holding the breath in a certain way,
the whole thing is in that state.
It's so vast, you know?
Ross, you have anything to say?
Well, it sounds wonderful.
[laughter]
[singing]